# Proportional-Electoral-College-Vote
This project explores the results of a proportional electoral college vote for Presidential elections going back to 1976.

Electoral data obtained from the [Harvard Dataverse.](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/42MVDX)

The purpose of this project is to determine the results of Presidential elections if the electoral college votes were given out as a proportion of votes cast rather than as a winner-take-all system as exists currently.

Run ```electdf.py``` file first along with the ```states_dict.py``` to process the ```1976-2020-president.csv``` file. This will create a new ```csv``` file with the cleaned data. Then run ```electoral_results.py``` to produce the results of the calculated proportional votes. The output is in a Python nested dictionary.

### Process

First I set the index column to the ```'year'``` for ease of use. I then dropped several columns that were either superfluous or unnecessary to the analysis. 
Second I deleted all the Write-In and blank votes. Since my methodology involves allocating the votes proportionally, it does not make sense to ever allocate any electoral votes to the write-in candidate. The write-in candidate entry represents several actual candidates, so any votes allocated to that entry would be inaccurate. (line 12-17 ```electdf.py```)
I then added a column to calculate the percent vote each candidate got. (line 19)

To add the state electoral votes, I merged a dataframe of the state electoral votes to the main dataframe. I used left ```merge``` because I wanted to keep all the data from the left dataframe (in this case ```electdf.py```) and merged on the columns ```'year'``` and ```'state'``` so that it kept those two columns together, which is crucial since the electoral votes for each state changes over the years. I also converted all the entries in the ```'state'``` to uppercase using the ```str.upper``` method to standardize the fields before the merge so there there was no issues. I had problems at first when I used ```capitalize``` because the multi-word states (like 'New Hampshire') didn't process correctly ('New Hampshire' became 'New hampshire'). (lines 21-22)

I then calculated the percent of electoral votes that each candidate received per state. When doing this I split off the whole number (```'vote_int'```) and the remainding fraction (```'vote_frac'```) for use later on. (line 24-26)

After that I needed to allocate any remaining electoral votes. I allocated these to the highest fractional votes, then the next highest, and so on, until no more remaining electoral votes were remaining. To do this, I grouped each state by year using ```groupby```. I then looped over each group (state by year) and found the candidates with the highest fractional remainders using ```nlargest``` on the ```vote_frac``` column. This allowed me to allocate the remaining electoral votes to the candidates with the highest fractional votes. I put these results into a dictionary for ease of access.

After this I exported the processed dataframe to a csv file for ease of viewing.

### Conclusions

Before starting the actual analysis and just looking at the data, my hypothesis would be that none of the elections would be overturned and that the gap of electoral votes would narrow in all races. I also hypothesized that third party candidates would capture some electoral votes. 

The advantages of this system are several. First, it gives a voice to the minority party in a state. If a state goes 51% towards one party, all those votes go to that party's candidate. Thus the minority party, in this case 49% of the votes, are essentially thrown away and meaningless. Take, for example, the 1984 election of Ronald Reagan versus Walter Modale. Reagan won 525 electoral votes to Mondale's 15. However, when you look at the popular vote Reagan won 54,455,075 to Mondale's 37,577,185, a much closer margin. When you use the proportional method, Reagan ends up with 320 to Mondale with 218. This helps fight voter disenfranchisement by allowing contestation of some electoral votes. While a large opposition push in a heavily skewed state is unlikely to turn over all the votes, it does allow for one or two electoral votes to be contested, so there is still some value in the opposition party to get their voter base out and thus make a possible difference, however incremental.

Second, it allows third party candidates a chance to get some electoral votes. The proportional system makes voting for a third party much less of a "throw-away" vote. While there is still a long way to go before a third party is a legitimate threat to the two party system, the proportional vote makes it a much more likely scenario. For example, in the 1992 election between George HW Bush and Bill Clinton, Independent candidate H. Ross Perot received 19,741,065 votes, but no electoral votes. In a proportional system, Perot would have received 105 electoral votes, still third place, but of course that is far more than zero. As noted above, the contestation of electoral votes would allow third parties the opportunity to be viable in our otherwise two party system. The stigma of "third party votes being meaningless" would be not be applicable any longer, as pushes towards a third party candidate would actually be able to succeed.

A proportional electoral system would not immediately drastically alter any results of our electoral system, while simultaneously allowing for more choice in voting outcomes. As it stands right now we have a defacto binary system and third parties cannot make any meaningful gains. Consider this example. Let's say that as a voter, while I do not particularly care for the Democrats, I know that I definitely do **not** want the Republican party candidate. I will vote for whomever has the greatest chance of winning versus the Republican. My only options under the two party system are to either not vote or to vote for the Democratic party candidate. The Democrat candidate is my only real option to get behind in order to not get a result of Republican. If I am in a state that typically goes Democrat, I can stay home and not worry about voting as I can be reasonably confident that the outcome will be to my preference, i.e. not Republican. However, if I am in a state that typically goes Republican, I can also stay home and not worry about voting as I can be reasonably sure that no matter my actions, my preferred outcome will **not** happen, i.e. a Republican will win, despite my best efforts. Voting for a third party candidate in these situations is either meaningless or actively goes against my own interests, as splitting the vote up against the Republican makes opposition weaker. With a proportional vote, however, the barrier for each candidate to get electoral votes is much lower, and takes the winner-takes-all stakes away. To go back to our example, if I am in a deep Republican state, I can still be confident that they will still get the majority of the electoral votes, the race is not so dire. To use another example, in the 2016 presidential race California had 55 electoral votes to award. Hillary Clinton won the state with 61.7% of the vote to Donald Trump's 31.6%. If you are a Republican voter, or indeed a candiate, California is a wash: the margin is large enough that it would be virtually impossible to flip the state without a massive upheaval. However, under the proportional system, Clinton would receive 33 votes while Trump would receive **continue from here**

An interesting note is that no election would be overturned except perhaps the 2016 election. Even the 2000 Bush versus Gore election allocated proportionally has Bush winning 264 to 263 (this is of course barring the exception of the [Supreme Court coming in to award the votes of Florida to Bush](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bush_v._Gore). The only election that would be questionable is the 2016 of Hillary Clinton versus Donald Trump. After allocating out the third party votes (Gary Johnson with 13, Jill Stein with 2, and Evan McMullin with 1) both Clinton and Trump end up with 259. As there is a tie, this [would trigger a vote in the House](https://www.thoughtco.com/when-presidential-election-is-a-tie-3322063) that is frankly out of the realm of scope of this project. 

-talk about redistricting and money in politics





